License Terms

of the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology Zuerich (Eidgenoessische 
Technische Hochschule Zuerich [ETHZ]), represented by Prof. Dr. Juerg 
Gutknecht, Institute for Computer Systems, (hereafter Institute), concerning
the Source Code to the Software OBERON System 3.


Article 1  Subject

Subject of these license terms is the source code of the software system
OBERON System 3, Release 2.x, hereafter referred to as source code.


Article 2  Rights of the Licensee

The Licensee shall be granted the right to use the source code in whole or in
part for private use, for conversion to another platform or for production of
an application software, to grant sub-licenses of the source code as well as,
under the condition of Article 3, to adapt or to modify it.


Article 3  Prohibition

(1) The Licensee may not do either of the following
    (a) modify the interfaces of the source code in any way that disagrees
        with style and content of the system
    (b) produce conversions to another platform that disagree with style and
        content of the system.

(2) In case of doubt the Institute shall be asked for written consent.


Article 4  Obligations of the Licensee

(1) Sub-licenses must confer the identical legal position which is granted by
the present license terms.  The Sub-Licensee must therefore be entitled to
the same rights and must be bound by the same obligations as well as by the
same prohibition as the Licensee.

(2) The source code of each module, also in each copy, must at the beginning
refer to the present license terms as follows:

  (* OBERON System 3, Release 2.x.

  Copyright 199x Team of the Institute of Computer Systems of ETH Zuerich,
  ETH Center, CH-8092 Zuerich, e-mail: oberon@inf.ethz.ch.

  This module may be used  under the conditions of the general Oberon 
  System 3 license contract.  The full text can be requested from the 
  above-mentioned address, or downloaded from
  
    "ftp://ftp.inf.ethz.ch/pub/software/Oberon/System3/license.txt;A"

  Under the license terms stated it is in particular (a) prohibited to modify
  the interface of this module in any way that disagrees with the style
  or content of the system and (b) requested to provide all conversions
  of the source code to another platform with the name OBERON. *)

(3) The source code and each conversion resulting from its utilization must 
be provided with the name OBERON and designate as author the "Team of the 
Institute for Computer Systems of ETH Zuerich" at the beginning.  Any further
developments, updates and applications must be marked "based on OBERON".

(4) Modifications by the Licensee are to be clearly identified.


Article 5  Consequences of Infringements

Each infringement of these license terms shall directly result in the loss of
the rights granted in Article 2.  There shall be no right to distribute those
products which have been produced in violation of this contract.


Article 6  Information

(1) Upon request the Institute (e-mail: oberon@inf.ethz.ch) shall provide the
Licensee with information on modifications, updates and further developments
of the source code by the Institute.

(2) Upon request the Licensee and each Sub-Licensee shall disclose to the
Institute their applications, modifications, updates and further developments
of the source code as well as the thereby gained experiences and knowledge.


Article 7  Liability

(1) The Institute does not assume any liability for damage directly or 
indirectly caused by the application of the source code.

(2) If a third party takes legal action based on infringement of its 
protective rights by the Licensee's use of the source code, the contract
party sued must immediately notify the other contract party.  The Licensee is
not entitled to conclude a settlement without the expressive and written 
consent of the Institute.


Article 8  Modifications

The Institute may modify these license terms.  The valid version may be
downloaded or requested as mentioned in Article 4 sub-paragraph 2.


Article 9  Validity and Duration of License

(1) Upon receipt of the source code these license terms are deemed to be
accepted.

(2) By notification with registered mail, the Institute may withdraw the
license or the sub-license with immediate effect.

(3) The obligations of the licensee according to Articles 3 and 4 
sub-paragraphs 2 - 4 shall remain effective even after the termination
of the license.


Article 10  Applicable Law and Place of Jurisdiction

This Agreement is governed by Swiss law.  Place of jurisdiction is Zuerich.


For the Institute:

Zuerich, June 6, 1996
Juerg Gutknecht
